DPAC Bylaws
CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS OF THE VANCOUVER SCHOOL DISTRICT PARENT ADVISORY COUNCIL October 25, 2007
Article I Name
The name of this organization shall be the Vancouver School District Parent Advisory Council.
Article II Object
The purpose of the Council is to represent parents/guardians of children in Vancouver (School District #39) schools at the district level. Pursuant to the School Act, the Vancouver School District Parent Advisory Council, hereafter referred to as DPAC, may advise the Board on any matter relating to education in the School District.
Article III Dissolution
Section 1: In the event of the dissolution or winding up of the Council, and after payment of all debts and costs of dissolution or winding up, the assets and remaining funds of the Council shall be distributed to a Parent Advisory Council of Councils within School District #39 (Vancouver), having purposes and objectives similar to those of the Council, and which meet all requirements of the British Columbia Gaming Commission. This clause shall be unalterable.
Section 2: In the event of the dissolution or winding up of the Council, all records of the organization shall be placed under the jurisdiction of the Secretary-Treasurer of School District # 39 (Vancouver).
Article IV Membership
Section 1: Each Parent Advisory Council (PAC) in the Vancouver School District may elect annually one (1) of its members to be its representative on DPAC for a term of not more than one (1) year. DPAC representatives are eligible for election for no more than three (3) one year terms.
Section 2: From time to time, DPAC vacancies may occur between annual elections. The Parent Advisory Council (PAC) of the vacant representative may elect or appoint a member to fill the vacant position for the remainder of the school year.
Article V Meetings
Section 1: All DPAC representatives will be invited to a district wide meeting, at a minimum, three (3) times from September through June of each school year at the call of the chair.
Section 2: The Annual Meeting of DPAC shall be held before the end of June each school year at which time the Annual Report will be presented.
    DPAC Bylaws
 
Section 3: A quorum shall consist of 50% plus 1 of DPAC representatives present and voting. Section 4: The Superintendent of Schools, a designate of the Superintendent or a Trustee of the
School District may attend any meeting of DPAC.
Section 5: Special meetings may be called by the chair or by the chair at the request of any member for the transaction of only such business as is stated in the call for the meeting. A special meeting shall be called upon
the request of a majority of DPAC representatives.
Section 6: Any complaint about the functioning of DPAC should be made to the Council through the chair and/or vice-chair.
1. Article VI Officers of the Council
Section 1: The officers of the District Parent Advisory Council shall form the executive council, hereafter referred to as Executive Council, and shall consist of the chair, vice-chair, secretary and treasurer and eight (8) members at large and up to two community representatives who shall have a voice but no vote and will not be subject to a) or b) below. Executive Council membership shall consist of twelve (12) parent representatives elected ifrom the Vancouver School District. To be eligible for election/appointment to the Executive Council an individual must:
a) be a parent/guardian of a child in grades K-12 in School District #39
b) be endorsed by the Parent Advisory Council of which s/he is a member c) be subject to provisions of Article X (Perception of Bias)
d) be an advocate of public education.
Section 2: Members of the Executive Council will be elected by city PACs on a ballot certified by the PAC chair or school DPAC representative in a manner to be determined by the Executive Council on or before June 30th each year.
Section 3: Candidates for the Executive Council are asked to commit to a one-year term, with the option of serving two additional years. Terms are staggered so that every year there will be a combination of new and experienced parents. Leaves of absence granted under Article VIII section 1, and Article X section 11, shall not extend an Executive Council member’s term of office.
Section 4: The chair of the Executive Council shall be elected by ballot at a June meeting of the Executive Council to serve as chair for a one-year term from July 1 until June 30. The chair will ordinarily be an Executive Council member who has already served one year on the Executive Council. The vice-chair, secretary and treasurer shall be elected by ballot in September.
Section 5: From time to time, vacancies on the Executive Council may occur between elections.
(a) In the event that the number of candidates wishing to fill the vacant positions does not exceed the number of vacancies, Executive Council shall, in a timely fashion, review the candidates and nominate candidates to fill the vacancies. The nominations will be subject to city-wide ratification by DPAC representatives. The Executive Council will determine the method of ratification.
Following ratification by city DPAC representatives, the Executive Council shall appoint members to the Executive Council for the remainder of the school year.
(b) In the event that the number of candidates wishing to fill the vacant position(s) exceeds the number of vacancies, DPAC shall, in a timely fashion, conduct a by-election. The winner(s) of the by-election will serve as member(s) of Executive Council for the remainder of the school year.
Section 6: No person shall hold the position of chair or vice-chair for more than two consecutive years.
Section 7: The Chair shall:
(a) convene and preside at all regular and special meetings
(b) ensure that an agenda is prepared and presented
(c) be an ex-officio member to all committees
(d) take such actions or ensure that such actions are taken by others to achieve the objectives and purpose of the organization
(e) be the official spokesperson for the Vancouver School District Parent Advisory Council. Section 8 The Vice-Chair shall:
(a) assume the chair's responsibilities in his/her absence
(b) assist the chair in the performance of his/her duties.
The secretary and treasurer shall share responsibility with the chair and vice-chair for managing DPAC gaming fund receipts and associated banking and reporting responsibilities.
Section 9 Members-at-Large shall perform such duties as are determined by the Executive Council.
Section 10: Executive Council members who fail to attend three consecutive Executive Council meetings may have their membership terminated in accord with Article V Section 11 b.
Section 11 Membership on the DPAC Executive Council shall be terminated for the following reasons
a) ceasing to be a parent/guardian of a child in grades K-12 in School District 39
b) failure to meet Executive Council attendance requirements (Article V Section 10) c) breach of the Executive Council Code of Conduct.
Section 12 Any complaint regarding another DPAC Executive Council member shall be made first to that member and then, if necessary, after informing that council member, the complaint shall be made in confidence to the Chair or Vice-Chair of the Executive Council.
Section 13 If, after investigation by officers of the Executive Council, termination of a member of the Executive Council is proposed, written notice of such action, accompanied by a brief statement of reason(s) shall be given to the members of the Executive Council including the member in question. The Executive Council will ensure that the member has had the opportunity to respond to the allegations before a resolution to terminate membership is voted upon.
Section 14 Individual Executive Council membership may be terminated by a resolution passed by not less than 2/3 of the votes cast at an Executive Council meeting attended by not less than 3⁄4 of the members of the Executive Council. The member who is the subject of the resolution may not vote on the resolution.
Article VII Executive Council Meetings
Section 1: Regular meetings of the Executive Council will be held on the second and fourth Thursday of every month, September through June. This schedule may be changed as the need arises by a majority vote of officers.
Section 2: A quorum shall consist of a simple majority of Executive Council members.
Section 3: The Executive Council will schedule district wide meetings of DPAC representatives, the Superintendent and/or designate at least three times each school year.
Article VIII Committees
Section 1: Executive Council may form special committees to deal with ongoing DPAC projects. Membership shall include representation from each area as agreed upon by a majority of Executive Council members. Special committees may invite representatives of other stakeholder groups to join, as participants or observers, when agreed to by a majority of Executive Council.
Section 2: Executive Council may form working committees (e.g., bylaws development) from time to time. Membership shall include interested DPAC representatives and school PAC members approved by a majority of Executive Council. Working committees may invite VSB staff to join such committees as non-voting members.
Section 3: By majority vote, Executive Council shall appoint Executive Council members to the Vancouver School Board’s five standing committees. Preference will be given to Executive Council members with at least one year’s experience on the Executive Council.
Section 4: By majority vote, Executive Council shall appoint DPAC representatives to VSB representational committees for a one-year term. All DPAC representatives and PAC members are eligible for appointment.
Section 5: By majority vote, Executive Council shall appoint Executive Council members to serve on administrator selection committees. If the appointment needs to be made between meetings, the chair shall make the appointment and notify the Executive Council at its next regular meeting.
Article IX Leave of Absence
An Executive Council member may request a leave of absence for reasons other than running for office (See Article XI section 11). This leave of absence may be granted by
a majority vote of members at an Executive Council meeting. A leave of absence is normally not granted for a period of longer than two months.
An Executive Council member on leave of absence may not act or speak as a district parent during their leave of absence.
Article X Perception of Bias
Section 1: Perception of bias refers to a situation that may exist if an individual who represents DPAC Executive Council to the Vancouver School Board, an external organization or the general public is also an employee or elected official of any school board. There may be a perception that they are not speaking solely in the interest of parents and this may diminish the power of what is said.
Section 2: The chairperson or vice-chairperson of DPAC Executive Council may not be an employee or an elected official of School District # 39. This restriction does not apply to other members of the DPAC, but no DPAC member may represent parents on any administrator selection committee or on any VSB standing or representational committee on which their employee group (e.g., VSTA, VESTA, VEPVPA, VASAA, CUPE, IUOE, VMREU etc.) is entitled to representation.
Article XI Code of Conduct
Section 1 Executive Council members direct any criticism of the action of another Executive Council member to that member first, and then if necessary, after informing that individual, may direct the criticism in confidence to the chair and/or vice-chair.
Section 2 A DPAC representative or Executive Council member who is approached by a parent with a concern is in a privileged position and should treat such discussion with discretion, respecting the confidentiality of the people involved.
Section 3 Executive Council members may indicate that they are speaking as a district parent to VSB and community committees and the media only when they are reflecting an opinion adopted by a majority of Executive Council members at an Executive Council meeting. If an Executive Council member is writing a letter to the editor, they may only sign it with their title if they are stating an official Executive Council position.
Section 4 As soon as any Executive Council member is nominated as a candidate for political office (e.g., school trustee, city councilor, MLA, MP) they must take leave from their position as district parent in order to maintain the integrity and political neutrality of the DPAC. If the Executive Council member is elected to public office, they shall resign from the Executive Council.
As terms of their leave of absence, the district parent/candidate shall:
a) turn over to the DPAC coordinator their list of PAC chairs/addresses. They will not use information from this confidential list in any way in their campaign.
b) withdraw from all DPAC functions during their leave (e.g., attendance at PAC meetings as an area district parent, attendance at DPAC meetings, etc.). The district parent will refer any phone requests from area PAC chairs to fellow area district parents.
c) refrain from using their title as DPAC member in any way during the campaign; they may only indicate as background information that they are a district parent on leave.
Section 5 The DPAC shall be non-partisan politically, as shall its members when speaking/acting on its behalf.
Article XII Indemnification
Executive Council members shall be indemnified for any costs, expenses or liabilities necessarily incurred in connection with the defense of any action, suit or proceeding in which they are made a party by reason of being or having been a member serving in an elected or appointed capacity. No Executive Council member shall be indemnified when judged in the action or suit to be liable for negligence or misconduct in the performance of duty.
Article XIII Parliamentary Authority
The rules contained in 21st Century Robert's Rules of Order shall govern the organization in all instances when they are applicable and not inconsistent with these bylaws and any other special rules the organization shall adopt.
Article XIV Amendment of Bylaws
These bylaws may be amended by a two-thirds vote of Executive Council members, providing that the notice of amendment was given at a previous Executive Council meeting and printed/circulated in the minutes of that meeting. All bylaw amendments are subject to ratification by a 2/3 vote of school DPAC representatives present and voting at the area meeting following the DPAC executive decision. If not so ratified, the amendment is deemed rescinded.
Adopted June, 1997 Revised December, 1997 Revised June, 1999 Revised February, 2003 Revised May, 2003
Revised December, 2004 Revised March 7, 2007 Revised October 25, 2007
